But Mackenzie is coming in via Zoom.
Just trying.
Welcome. You're welcome to come to the table, actually.
We're hearing our petitioners through
Zoom first. So we'll bring you in too, or whoever
else is coming too.
Just me, I think.
And we'll just when we get-- Oh, Mackenzie, you're here. Welcome.
Kia ora. Hi.
I'm Gregor Conroy, chair of the committee, and the other members are...
Greg Clemming, MP for Maungakiekie in Auckland.
I'm Paulo Garcia,
to Greg's right. MP for New Lynn.
Both of you
to my right.
No, no, she can't see.
Hello, Mackenzie.
Hello.
All right.
And...
Kia ora.
Celia Wade-Brown. I'm based in the Wairarapa.
All right. Thank you. So Mackenzie, thanks for joining us today.
If you take your petition, your submission as read, but
certainly feel free to speak to it.
We've got you for 10 minutes, so how you use your 10 minutes is up to you, but it'd
be good if you could leave us some time for questions.
Yeah, sure thing.
Yeah, so hi, my name is Mackenzie Dao.
I'm the petitioner for requiring plain English
labeling on beauty and cosmetic products.
So the reason that I am petitioning this, and the reason why it is so
close to my heart is because I was diagnosed with celiac
disease when I was 18 months old,
which is an autoimmune disease. And it's something I have to live
with every day.
Most people believe that celiac disease
is just about what you put into your body,
but it is actually what we put on our bodies as
well. There's a
symptom of celiac disease called contact dermatitis, where if
you put any product on your body which contains
anything containing gluten, wheat, oats,
et cetera,
you can break out in quite a nasty rash that can
be very painful and
just is a horrible thing to have. I do have some pictures of it
that I can send if you'd like.
So yeah, that is what happens. It's not only
something that happens for people with celiac disease, though.
It also happens for people with other allergies, your nuts and your
eggs and stuff.
And the problem that we strike is that on cosmetic
products, there's no laws around how they label their
allergens. So
there is, I want to say, over 10 different
scientific words for gluten
or gluten-containing products. A couple examples
are there's horden, which is barley, aviens,
which is oats,
triticum, which is wheat. All words that are
scientific, the common person doesn't know.
So when you look at something on a cosmetic product, you don't
recognize those words, so you don't think twice about it until you
react.
And another thing is that
most cosmetic products, they claim that their product wasn't
created to be ingested, and that is correct in most instances.
But there are some cosmetic products that we do ingest, even if it is
unintentional. Things such as toothpastes, lip
balms, lipsticks, et cetera. We do ingest those
in minuscule amounts, but they do affect those of us with severe
allergies. And that not only affects
those of us with celiac disease, but people who have anaphylaxis to things like
nuts. It can be really tricky for them to find products
that they can put on their face and their body when there is that risk
of the exposure of potentially
swallowing some.
So
basically,
what I'm asking the committee to consider is passing a law that requires all
cosmetic and beauty companies to list ingredients in their common English
instead of their scientific names.
It would make it a lot more easy for us suffering from
allergies and those with life-threatening allergies to read and understand the
products and what we're putting onto our bodies.
Not only for us with allergies. Lots of people
throughout time are starting to want to know more about what they
are putting on their bodies, and it's really difficult
when it's all these scientific names that nobody
understands.
So yeah, the passing of this law, I believe, will be super straightforward for
companies.
It won't require them to change any
ingredients. It'll just require them to
just change their labels. It will be quite
straightforward,
just changing it from the scientific name to the English name.
And I believe it won't cost these companies
anything major. It's not going to be a major money
thing.
I just overall think that this
clear labeling will
benefit everybody overall.
It won't cause any
issues for the companies.
And I think this measure, if it's implemented,
there should be no negative consequences, and it will
benefit all New Zealanders
who want to know more about what they're putting on their bodies, what
is-Going on their skin
and what to
expect when they do put it on their skin.
So yeah, thank you for the opportunity to submit this.
So yeah, if you have any questions.
All right. Look, thank you very much, Mackenzie.
Questions, members?
Yeah. Kia ora, Mackenzie. Thank you very much for this.
Sure.
Would it be fair to say, to assume that most of the products that you're referring
to would be imported?
No,
not all. Some will be, but a lot of New
Zealand-made products-
Okay
... they also do that. They don't have any kind of
allergen statements on them.
Right.
And I'm not asking-
Do you think then that would be-- I'm just thinking
the reality, the practicality of
doing this for imported products,
it would be
very complex.
Yes.
You'd be asking all importers to relabel the products.
There's complexities there, and obviously all of that cost
is going to be passed on to the consumer.
And given the relatively small number of people for whom
this is an issue, it would seem a big
stretch to
increase the price for everybody for that.
I'm just trying to think whether there's another way of achieving what you're
wanting to achieve, which is to access that information.
So there were two questions. One was that I'd love to know
what percentage of the products are made in New
Zealand, where the labeling potentially could be changed, because you're
right, the manufacturers in New Zealand are subject to our laws,
whereas obviously manufacturers overseas are not.
So it would become the responsibility of the importers.
And then the second question is around whether it would be possible
to achieve this in some other way. So
let's imagine that there's a dozen common
offending ingredients.
Mm-hmm.
Rather than going through the complexity and the cost of
relabeling all these products, is
there some way that that information could be communicated to people for whom that
information
is very important for their health?
Yeah. So in terms of New Zealand products
versus imported products,
I don't have a number for that.
And I understand that it would be difficult for
international products. But saying that, I think
getting it going with products made here
would be good. A lot of products
that are used commonly are made in New
Zealand.
And I think even if we
have that option
as something,
it would give those of us who have these
issues options, because at the moment we don't really
have options. It's very difficult to find something.
Even though we might not be able to look across at
other places that have
brought their product into the country, we can support local, we can
use local businesses.
Right.
I think that would-
Okay
... be good. Yeah.
Mackenzie, is there a celiac support society or
there is a society that-
Yeah. So Celiac New Zealand, I'm a volunteer for
them. I've spoken to them about this.
Unfortunately, it was a little bit too late to get an official
statement from them. They are supportive, but I don't
have the official statement from them.
And I'm involved with organizing events and
stuff to help those with celiac disease,
especially those who are freshly diagnosed,
and particularly around this area.
Because a lot of people don't realize, and they
change their entire diet, and they're still dealing with symptoms, and they don't
know why. And then we bring this in, and we say, "What products
are you using?" And they go, "Oh, I'm using this, and
this contains oats." And that's what's actually doing the
damage. They don't realize
that these products are an issue.
So just-
And are there any other products, not cosmetics, that this would
be pertinent to? I'm just trying to think, is there any other thing,
that type range of products other than
cosmetics that
people in your position would have a similar issue with?
I don't believe so.
Fine then.
Food, that's got all the laws
there are good.
It's mainly just the things that we are
using, especially around the face area.
So yeah, your makeups and
moisturizers, yeah,
shampoo, conditioner, et cetera, that are the main
concern. Yeah.
All right, thanks. Celia.
Thank you very much for bringing this to us and for raising our
awareness about the issue. I just had a
little look at that international
nomenclature name, INCI.
Mm-hmm.
And I guess I come from
the background of botany, where if you are not
careful, an English or for that matter, Maori or other
indigenous name,
doesn't necessarily tie to a particular species.
So quite often it's more accurate to use the Latin name or an
internationally agreed name. I
just feel a little bit nervous. I'd like your response to-- I feel a bit
nervous that if we-Use common English
names, we actually might end up being less informative.
And you rattled off those scientific names beautifully
when you talked about
try whatever it is that's wheat-
Yeah
... and things like that. So I just wonder if maybe our effort should be making
sure that people do know that equivalence.
Well, another option
is that actually we keep those names in there,
but you put in brackets next to it the common English
name. So people are still going to be able to see
what it is.
Like Aven, that is oats, and that's in a lot of moisturizer.
Still leave that there, just with in brackets
oats next to it or something. Just a word that we-
Yeah. Interesting
... know.
And it's just-
That's sort of interest-- yeah, that's a possibility.
You could also just have it at, and again, I don't want to
create more problems for small businesses.
But-
Yeah
... rather than having tried it,
those
names are already incredibly small on the ingredient list, and I
certainly go cross-eyed looking.
I was just thinking, are there a sort of half dozen most important
ones that we could be just,
whether it's, I don't know, through magazines or in shops or something,
promoting that list of, this is what you could be looking for?
Yeah. Even just making sure people are more informed.
Because yeah, it is a thing where a lot of people are
continuing to be unwell, and they don't understand why.
Mm.
And that is why it's kind of seeping in.
And they also have, like I said, this contact dermatitis that
happens-
Mm
... is very severe. It causes very terrible open
wounds on the skin,
which can be super painful.
Mm.
And-
All right. Well look, Mackenzie, we'll just here now, we've
got the-
Okay
... Environment Protection Authority here, and we'll
just hear from them and then it may well be that if you stay on,
it may well be after that we've heard from,
is it Dr. Torres Valdez? Valdez?
No. It's Dr. Sean Preso-
Sean Preso
... standing in for-
All right
... Dr. Torres Valdez.
That's okay.
Dr. Preso. So we'll hear from you now, so thank you.
Yeah. Great. Yeah, thank you for the opportunity to submit on this petition.
My name is Sean Preso, I'm the manager of hazardous substances reassessments at the
Environmental Protection Authority.
One of the EPA's functions is to regulate all hazardous substances imported or
manufactured in New Zealand, and this includes cosmetics.
And it might be helpful to explain to the committee why cosmetics are regulated as
hazardous substances. The Hazardous Substances and New Organisms
Act regulates substances classified as hazardous, and these
classifications come to us and are aligned with the globally
harmonized system of classification and labeling known as GHS
7. Common classifications are skin irritants or
sensitizers, eye irritants, flammability, environmental
toxicity-
Yeah
... and acute toxicity, among many others.
When the HazNo act was passed, it regulated cosmetics along with household
and industrial cleaning products, dental products, and paints.
It also created a mechanism for the EPA to approve group standards, which approve
many similar hazardous products at once instead of each one individually.
And there are currently 208 group standards.
Each group standard applies to products that are used in similar ways, have defined
classifications, and therefore have similar risks.
One of these is the Cosmetic Products Group Standard, which approves
all cosmetic products. It sets rules for the ingredients in
cosmetics, including ingredients that must not be used, ingredients that can
only be used in limited amounts, and ingredients that are allowed only for
certain product types. It also requires products to meet labeling,
packaging, and safety requirements, and is closely aligned with the European
Union Cosmetic Products Directive so that New Zealand settings
reflect international best practice.
With regards to labeling, product labels must contain a list of the
ingredients and concentrations of 1% or more in descending order,
and a list of ingredients in the product in concentration of less than 1% in any
order. So all ingredients must appear on the label.
Schedule 5 of the group standard lists substances that can only be used under
certain restrictions,
such as concentration limits, use only by professionals, or labeling
statements to minimize risk. Known allergens typically appear in
Schedule 5, along with specific restrictions to increase
safety.
Further restrictions on coloring agents, preservatives, and UV filters are listed
in Schedules 6, 7, and 8, and these restrictions are driven by
toxicological concerns, which can include allergenic potential.
Cosmetic product ingredients may be listed using the International Nomenclature
Cosmetic Ingredient, or INCI names, or alternatively, common
chemical names can be used.
INCI names are harmonized globally and designed to allow
identification of ingredients across products
in case of adverse effects, for publishing of scientific information on
effects, and to avoid confusion by having multiple names for single
substances.
The group standard also includes an international alignment provision.
If a cosmetic label complies with the allergen labeling rules of certain
overseas jurisdictions, for example, the European Union, Australia, the
United States, or Canada, that label is treated as compliant in
New Zealand.
Note that the product itself still must be compliant with the group standard,
but the label can be the local label generated there.
This avoids businesses having to create New Zealand-specific labels due to
differences in labeling requirements, and without this international alignment, it
could be difficult for international cosmetic products to be imported into New
Zealand in some casesThe EPA most recently updated
the group standard in 2024, and the changes came into effect on the 1st
of January 2026. The main changes were to align with
rules in Europe to update the schedules of the prohibited, restricted, and allowed
ingredients, and to phase out PFAS ingredients over time, so
perfluoroalkyl substances.
If we were to consider making the specific labeling change requested by the
permission, the process for updating the group standard involves the EPA developing
a proposal to change it. Alternatively, an application can also be
initiated by a third party.
The proposal is publicly notified and then referred to a decision-making committee
who will receive public submissions and then may hold a public hearing.
This update would require notification to the World Trade Organization for
submissions from trading partners due to the potential impact of the update as an
international technical barrier to trade.
The EPA does not recommend that we include listing of common allergens
on cosmetics beyond what is already done for the following
reasons. All ingredients in cosmetics are already listed under
standardized names, and recognition of international labels means that we
cannot ensure that all labels will have this information consistently.
Thank you.
All right. I see that.
I think that's very interesting. I've just wondered, something like
wheat is not, for most people, in any way a
hazardous
substance. So
what are the requirements for
labeling? Is it just because cosmetics need
all of the ingredients to be labeled?
It's not because wheat is hazardous to most people.
Yes. So all products that fall under the group standard
require all ingredients to be listed, regardless of hazard potential.
All right. So what we're hearing is that these products
sold will have the ingredients on there.
It's just about labeling them. Mackenzie, what you're saying, it's either an
education thing to ensure that, presumably now,
you know what to look for, but you'll be talking to
others or there are others who-
I don't know what to look for 100%. There are just so
many different names.
I can't remember them all.
And yeah, I'm not asking anybody to change
what they're putting in their products.
It's just
being more
forthcoming with their labeling.
What the committee will do, we'll be making a recommendation.
And look, we haven't discussed it yet, but were we
to-- because we have got a submission here from Cosmetics New
Zealand.
You wouldn't have seen that, but basically what they're
saying, it would be out of step with international cosmetic regulatory
frameworks, which is sort of what we've now just heard.
So were we to
not recommend that it be
compulsory,
we're always looking for a solution that might work.
Mm-hmm.
If we weren't to recommend that
or to enshrine that in law, what is something that
might work to make it
more safer, really, for want of a better word,
for people in your position? And that was what we thought
maybe we may even decide to, if
the allergy... I'm sorry, if the
celiac support group, if they have
any, we may even decide to hear from them to see if there's an easier way
just through education.
Yeah. There's the Celiac Disease New Zealand Foundation.
They are amazing, but they
just don't have the funds to be completing
anything major. And there's also Allergies New
Zealand, who are pretty much in the same boat.
They want to do more. They want
to create things that can be more informal, but the funds just
aren't there.
Mm-hmm. All right.
So
yeah, anything that can just help with education would be
incredible,
and
making it easier for us to read the labels
and know what is in the products.
Can I just ask one thing? Mackenzie, it seems that the major issue is gluten.
Is that fair to say?
For me personally, yes. But
products can contain things like nuts, and nuts-
Right
... can be a deadly allergy.
Yeah. Sure.
And if it's going to be used, lip balms and
stuff. If that goes on your lip and you've got anaphylaxis to nuts-
Mm
... that can be very dangerous.
Yeah.
So it's not just-
Yeah, I just wonder if what
might be more achievable is a requirement that
products that contain gluten
or nuts-
Mm-hmm
...
say that. You'd be talking about one sticker.
Yeah.
You wouldn't be talking about having to relabel.
That was my original petition-
Right
... but I was asked to change it to make it slightly different.
Right.
So that is something I would definitely be for. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you.
All right. Well, thank you. Any more questions, members, of either of our
submitters?
Yes. I just wondered if you had any oversea-- Given
we're operating to some extent in an international
situation here, although I really do hear what you say about buy
local if you can-Have you
seen
a better set of information from another country?
Obviously they still have to comply with the international things, but
the Australian ones have got an allergy certified
label where they use where those common allergens are not in the
product. Because I don't have
that problem, I haven't observed when I've popped in to
the local chemist whether that's here as well.
Yeah, there is
some international companies which do sell here, which I've used,
which do directly state that their products
are free of gluten, free of nuts, et cetera.
And
that is incredible. I don't know what the process they have to go through
to get that is. I know in New Zealand it is
quite the process to be able to state your product is gluten-free,
when it's a food product at least.
But that's definitely an option,
if it potentially wasn't as rigorous as food products.
But yeah, there are some good products out there
from overseas which do state the allergies.
I'm not sure if it's their
personal decision as a company to do that, or if it's a law thing in
another country.
Marketing device.
All right. Look, well look, thank you McKenzie. We'll have to keep moving.
We've got other people-
That's fine
... unfortunately, to see today. But no, I think
we as a committee like to leave our meetings knowing a lot more than
when we arrived, and certainly as a result of both our submissions today, we
will be doing that.
And as someone who's actually gluten intolerant myself, I have some
empathy for you there.
That's good.
When they get it wrong, they get it wrong. So, yeah.
Yeah.
All right. Thank you very much, both.
Thank you so much